Friends, welcome to Word on Fire Catholic Ministries.
Word on Fire is an apostolate dedicated to the mission of evangelization, using media both old and new to share the faith on every continent and to facilitate an encounter with Christ and His Church.
The efforts of Word on Fire engage the culture and bring the transformative power of God's Word where it is most needed.
Today,
We invite you to join Bishop Robert Barron as he preaches the gospel and shares the warmth and light of Christ with each one of us.
Peace be with you.
Friends, for this Sunday, I want to talk to you once again about faith.
I know I talk a lot about that, but as I've said before, it's the most misunderstood word in the religious vocabulary.
So here I go again.
Follow the Bible as it walks around this phenomenon of faith, because faith is so central, but also so misunderstood.
In our time, the way it's most misunderstood is faith is a kind of superstition.
Faith is a stupid acceptance of things on the basis of no evidence.
Faith is believing in any old nonsense.
That's not what faith means.
It never means that in the Bible.
That's the sort of modern rationalism that is caricatured
religious faith.
But look in the Bible as it talks about it a lot.
It never, ever means that by faith.
You know, whatever talks about Abraham, pay attention to those stories because Abraham is our father in faith.
So those are always about it.
Remember a few weeks ago, we had that wonderful passage from the letter to the Hebrews that talks about faith as a kind of pressing ahead toward things that we cannot see.
It's a kind of spiritual adventure, right?
Well, both reading one today and the gospel shed
Very interesting light, I think, on the nature of faith.
So reading one is from a little-known minor prophet called Habakkuk.
Habakkuk is a wonderful figure, actually, and the book is brief, but really punching and interesting.
Writing at a time, I'll simplify it.
When Israel's going through a lot of struggle, the people are wondering what God is up to.
Where is God?
Listen now to this language.
So he's channeling the voice of the people Israel.
How long, O Lord, I cry for help, but you do not listen.
I cry out to you violence, but you do not intervene.
Why do you let me see ruin?
Why must I look at misery?
Destruction and violence are before me.
That sound familiar?
That's a credica, right?
A cry of the heart that you could, almost any moment in human history, you could credibly hear that.
How many times have we said that in our lives?
Something's going wrong.
We're going through times of great pain and suffering, failure, violence.
Where are you, God?
What's the problem?
When are you coming?
When are you going to keep your promise to us?
So it wills naturally up out of the human heart, this kind of question.
Well, where's it coming from, this sort of attitude?
Can I suggest this?
It's coming from
the very narrow place, the very narrow compass of what we can understand and perceive.
Think for a second, we have these bodies with this little sensarium of eyes and ears and so on.
So we can take in what these senses are capable of taking in.
Our minds can roam around reality, yeah, to some degree, but what we understand
of the present much less the future, it's almost nothing.
We have a little tiny swath of reality that we're able to control or understand.
And so from that perspective, yes, we tend to say, what's going on?
I don't get it.
God exists, they tell me God exists, but it doesn't seem to be doing anything.
Well, yeah, within this very, very narrow compass, think of,
If a page of a great novel was ripped out and then it was thrown to the wind and then many months later, you happen to stumble upon the single page and you pick it up and it's an English and you can read it and it's given you a little tiny snippet of the story.
But if you were to say, well, wherever that book comes from, it doesn't make a liquor sense.
This book is ridiculous.
Well, no, you're reading one page out of a thousand page story.
See, what's required, everybody?
Now we're going to shed some light on faith.
What's required is a surrender in trust to God's perspective, God's plan, God's purpose.
I can't see it.
All I see is violence and destruction and you're not doing anything.
Yeah, yeah, I know.
I know.
That's what you can see of my creation.
Faith
is an acceptance in humility and trust of God's vision plan purpose.
Now, listen to how God answers this cry of heart that's in all of our hearts, listen.
Then the Lord answered me and He said, write down the vision clearly upon the tablets so that one can read it readily, for the vision still has its time, presses on,
to fulfillment and it will not disappoint.
If it delays, wait for it.
It will surely come.
It will not be late.
The rash one has no integrity, but the just one because of his faith will live.
All right.
So Lord, where are you?
Doesn't make any sense.
Have faith and it means what?
that the vision has its time on God's time.
God's work is being done.
Trust in it.
It presses on to fulfillment.
Maybe you can't see how it's happening, but it's happening.
It will not disappoint.
God is never gonna give up on his creation.
That's a basic biblical truth.
God is not about a failed work.
No, no.
And if it delays,
Yeah, from my perspective, it's delayed.
I don't see it.
I don't get it.
If it delays, wait for it.
See, what is that, everybody?
That's the attitude of faith.
Waiting and trust for what God will do.
The rash one has no integrity.
Well, that's most of us in our sin.
I'm rash.
I want an answer now.
Put it to me on my terms.
Well, that person has no integrity.
But the just one,
because of his faith will live.
Right.
How do we live spiritually by faith, by an attitude of humble trust in the ways of the Lord?
Okay, that's Habakkuk reading number one.
And it's preparing us for the gospel, which is to me really interesting text, the way it's pieced together.
just before our gospel from Luke.
What we have is Jesus' command to forgive extravagantly.
You know, 70 times, seven times, forgive, forgive even your enemies, forgive, forgive.
And the disciples, here's where our gospel today commences, disciples say to the Lord, increase our faith.
They're saying, okay, I get the command, but it's so impossible.
Can you at least increase our faith so we can move into the space that you're offering to us?
And Jesus replies, if you have faith the size of a mustard seed, you would say to this mulberry tree, be uprooted and planted in the seed and it would obey you.
And what's he saying here, everybody?
Faith is this humble trust in the power of God.
Hey, forgive your worst enemy.
Well, I can't do that on my own.
Like I can just muster the psychological strength to do it.
But listen, the tiniest bit of trust, of humble trust, little sea, little mustard seed, that's all you need to unleash all the power in the world.
Because faith isn't open as to God.
God who makes the universe
So the tiniest little, look, crack in the carapace, the shell of your own egotism, that the tiniest little crack in that will let in enormous amounts of light, shift the metaphor, will unleash enormous amounts of energy.
The just person will live by faith, right?
Right.
That's what makes your life wonderful and rich worth living.
Okay, but now watch how this teaching of Jesus is juxtaposed to a little story.
I must say for many years, as I meditate on this gospel, it always struck me as a bit puzzling or a bit of a non-sequitur, like, well, how do you get from that statement about faith, the size of a mustard seed to this parable?
Well, listen to the parable.
Who among you would say to your servant who's just come in from plowing and tending the sheep?
Come here immediately.
Take your place at the table.
No, I mean, wouldn't he rather say to him, prepare for me something to eat.
And then after we're all serving, you can eat something.
So he's talking about a master and a servant of some kind.
The servant's been out the field all day, laboring, hot sun.
And after this long day of labor comes in,
Well, wouldn't it be nice if the master were to say, come on, come on.
You've got a hard day to work.
Come sit here and let me reward you with a nice meal.
No, no, no, since this is a story.
No, you've been working out there in the field all day.
All right, now come in.
It's now your turn to work inside.
Wait on table and serve me and my friends.
And afterwards, something, it seems kind of rough, kind of unfair.
Shouldn't you give this guy a little reward?
Why not?
When you've done all you've been commanded, say, we are unprofitable servants.
We have done what we are obliged to do.
Now, here's the point.
I think then you'll see how it's connected to the first statement.
What's being urged here, everybody, is the stance of humble service.
In our egotism, we think God owes us an explanation.
God owes us some reward.
Hey, yeah, I've been at this all day.
I've been serving you Lord all day.
I've been doing your will.
Don't I get a little something in return?
See, if I'm in that space, where am I?
I'm still in that little tiny egocentric world where I'm expecting recognition, reward, acknowledgement.
Spiritly speaking, that's a waste of time.
The humble person is the one who says,
No, Lord, I exist to serve you.
And in fact, in serving you who need nothing.
Remember, I've told you that many times, everybody, and it's very, very important in this spiritual order.
If we think God needs something from us, then we're all gonna be playing this silly game.
God doesn't need anything from us, which is why serving Him lifts us up.
and makes us more alive.
Don't think of it as I'm laboring in the hot sun.
Think of it.
No, by obeying you, Lord, by doing what you want, by breaking out of this little narrow space of my egotism, I now live for the first time.
The just man will live by faith.
Right.
Break out of this little narrow space where you're playing games with the ego and recognition and who deserves more.
If you're serving God in that way, you're not in the right space.
You're still in a kind of servile relationship to God.
But what did Jesus say?
I no longer call you servants, but friends.
That's what God wants.
That's what's
enlivening to us spiritually when we become the friends of God.
Now, link these two things together.
Increase our faith.
If you had the faith of a mustard seed, you'd have all the power in the world.
What's faith?
It's breaking out of egotism.
It's trusting in the power and the love and the plan and the project of God for us.
It's surrendering to God's purpose that we might really be alive.
That's where power comes from, where's where light comes from.
Humility, everybody, and faith are urged upon us by all the spiritual masters.
Bernard was asked, what are the three greatest virtues?
He said, humility toss, humility toss, and humility toss.
Thomas Aquinas, what opens the door to the spiritual life?
Faith, faith.
The Bible, without faith, we can't be pleasing to God.
Right, right.
Faith, everybody, is the way in a trusting surrender to the love, purpose, and plan of God.
And God bless you.
Thank you for listening to this week's homily from Bishop Robert Barron,
For more resources from Bishop Barron, please visit wordonfire.org.